# How to Setup LLVM 18 for MLIR standalone out-of-tree template in Ubuntu 20.04+ (For Newbies)
We will be building **LLVM 18** from source. The manual way/process I am going to discuss, completely avoids any kind of package install (e.g. `llvm-18-dev`, `libclang-18-dev`, etc.) using package installer (e.g. `yum`, `apt-get`, `rpm`) into our OS; not only for llvm-18 build, but also for all the pre-requisites. So, why manual process? 😉
**Advantages**
1. You have the complete control over your dev environment.
2. If something goes heywire, just delete the folder, remove/omit the ENV variables from your `.bashrc` or `.profile` or `.bash_profile`. Then your system is clean! You donot need to pull your hair purging/removing leftovers in your OS's rootfs. For Ubuntu, we will editing `.profile`. And it is located here in your `$HOME` directory, `/home/$USERNAME`. It can be also written as `~/.profile`, where `~/` expands to `/home/$USERNAME`.
3. You will **LEARN**, how to manage + play with your `ENV` vars (e.g. `$HOME`, `$YOUR_CUSTOM_ENV_VARIABLE`, etc.) + shell. This kind of knowledge are priceless, if you want to mess around with compiler dev.

**Disadvantage**
1. You have to do + keep track of everything manually. 
2. Takes a significant amount of time. You need to be patient. 😒

**WHY MANUAL INSTALLATION WORTH IT! (MUST READ)**
But my opinion is, manual process worth it! In beginning FOR ANY KIND OF PURPOSE, if you install `llvm` using standard ubuntu `apt-get` package manager, the process is very very easy. But later, if you need to install/use different versions of `clang`, or, issues/problems/bugs popup out of nowhere while changing/removing the versions, or, there are other package related issues, your life start to get worse 😐! It takes hours or days to find + fix those kind of issue. And I am really tired of those s#?@# 😓. A lot of people use `update-alternatives` to manage different versions of `llvm`. Read [How to manage `gcc`, `clang` or `llvm` with `update-alternatives`](HOW-TO-MANAGE-MULTIVERSION-gcc-clang-LLVM-WITH-update-alternatives.md). But I still prefer the manual process.

The same idea goes true for other packages like `cmake`, `ninja`. I always encourage to avoid `apt-get` installer unless you really **HAVE TO.** Yes obviously, there are some universal packages like `zlib1g-dev`, `libgmp3-dev`, etc. which are really complicated to setup without using `apt-get` installer. And you really don't need to change the versions of them unless you have a very very special case. For those use the package installer.

[Disclaimer: Opinions given above, are completely from my personal experience. Different developer have might different views. The main point is, to enlighten you with different perspective. Everything depends on usecase.]



## The Process at glance

- **1. Prerequisites** section discussed about the things you need to build LLVM from scratch. `cmake` & `ninja` for facilitating the build process. And then you need `clang` compiler bins to run the llvm build process faster. That's why we need to setup the `clang` "prebuilt binaries". You can also install it with `apt-get`, but it also comes with consequences, which are explained in details. But still you can use `gcc` & `g++` compilers to build llvm.

- **2. How to build `LLVM`** section described the build process in great details including, the most confusing part (i.e. how to choose `cmake` config) for newbies. Even if you want to work with `CUDA`, the advanced `configs` are shared. Those `cmake` configs are tested, and runs without any issue, if you follow the build process described here in this section.

- **3. (OPTIONAL, But RECOMMENDED) How to register the `installation/bin` to the `$PATH`, and `installation/lib` to `$LD_LIBRARY_PATH`** section explained, why you need to include the binaries, libs you just built, to the OS `$PATH`. Because to avoid unwanted issues/bugs, I would highly recommend you to use the built `clang`, `clang++`, `lld` bins for building standalone MLIR project.  

- **How to Play with OS `$PATH` & `~/.profile`?** There are no defined section here with this title. But the top-to-bottom workflow presented here, used the OS `$PATH` & `~/.profile`. If you are not familiar with configuring `$PATH` and `~/.profile`, trust me, you are going to learn how to use them! As compiler engineer/researcher, you **HAVE TO KNOW** how to use them in every way possible.

- **This process Works!! 😃** This build process works, garaunteed 😃😃😃! A strong claim, I know 🙂. Why? Because we taken the control over every single package installation, except the packages here in this section **1.3. (OPTIONAL) Install other packages**. If previously, you didn't install any of them using the `apt-get` installer, or no overlap/version contradiction happens with old installation, everything will work!!


## 1. Prerequisites
### 1.1. Install `cmake`:
- If you already have `cmake` in your OS, skip this section.
- Download the `cmake` binary (typically named `cmake-3.x.x-linux-x86_64.tar.gz`) from [here](https://cmake.org/download/). Then extract the `tar` to your convenient locations. Rename the extracted tar name to `cmake` if you want. So that later, if a new `cmake` version comes, then you can just remove + replace the contents of `cmake` folder with the new versions. After that register the `bin` with `$PATH` in `~/.profile` with that. Then reboot or logout + login. The best part of this technique is, you don't even have to handle `apt-get --purge` or `--remove` type command anymore, when you go for updating `cmake` version. Even you don't need to reboot your computer again 😃.
```sh
export LOCAL="$HOME/installed-programs"
# Your case might be like following. Check and Double check your /path/location/to/bin always.
# export LOCAL="$HOME/path/to/other/place"

# For Cmake
export CMAKE_ROOT=$LOCAL/cmake
export CMAKE_BINARY_DIR=$CMAKE_ROOT/bin
export PATH=$CMAKE_BINARY_DIR${PATH:+:${PATH}}
```


### 1.2. Install `ninja`:
- If you already have `ninja` in your OS, skip this section.
- Download the `ninja` binary from [here](https://github.com/ninja-build/ninja/releases) and set the following ENV with `$PATH` in `~/.profile`. Follow the same process described for `cmake` installation. Just add the following paths after `cmake` paths. Then reboot or logout + login.
```sh
# For ninja
export NINJA_ROOT=$LOCAL/ninja
export PATH=$NINJA_ROOT${PATH:+:${PATH}}
```

### 1.3. (OPTIONAL) Install other packages

If you don't want to use `clang`, `clang++` to build `llvm`, then you have to install the Ubuntu `build-essential` package to get `gcc` and `g++` compiler. They are explained in details in the upcoming section **1.4. Decide which compiler (i.e. `clang` or `gcc`) to use to build `llvm`**. The other packages like `xutils-dev`, `bison`, etc. are not mandatory.
```sh
sudo apt-get install -y build-essential
# Or, if you want to play with Polyhedral compiler tool like "Pluto" later
sudo apt-get install -y xutils-dev bison zlib1g-dev flex libglu1-mesa-dev libgmp3-dev
sudo apt-get install -y texinfo autoconf libtool libtool-bin pkg-config
```


### 1.4. Decide which compiler (i.e. `clang` or `gcc`) to use to build `llvm`
**WHY?**
- For building `llvm` from source, you can use `gcc`, `g++` compiler. However, they are slower. But they work, don't worry. 😉
- For faster build process, you need `clang`, `clang++` compiler, and `lld` linker. HIGHLY RECOMMENDED.
**How to**
- Jump to **_1.3.1._** if your want to use `gcc`
- Jump to **_1.3.2._** if you want to use `clang`


### _1.4.1. Install `gcc`, `g++` (OPTIONAL)_
Skip this section in following cases:
- You have done it already by following the instructions given in section **1.3. (OPTIONAL) Install other packages**.
- Or, You already have them in your OS.
- Or, You don't want to use them for building `llvm`
```sh
sudo apt-get install build-essential
```


### _1.4.2. Install `clang`, `clang++`, `lld` binaries_

- **(IMPORTANT) If you already have `clang` (i.e. `llvm`) in your OS, skip this section. How to check it? Type command `clang --version` or `llvm-config --version`.**

**1.4.2.1. Setup prebuilt `clang` binaries: Manual Process (HIGHLY RECOMMENDED)**
- Download file `clang+llvm-16.0.0-x86_64-linux-gnu-ubuntu-18.04.tar.xz` for ubuntu from [here](https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/releases/tag/llvmorg-16.0.0). Or, you can download the latest prebuilt binaries from there.
- Extract the tar to your convenient location. Let's assume, after the extraction, the folder name and location would be `$HOME/installed-programs/clang-and-llvm-16-prebuilt-binaries`. Feel free to set your own directory if you like.
- setup and update your `~/.profile` like following. You can see, `cmake` and `ninja` locations are already registered to `$PATH`, what we have done earlier. So don't be confused 😊.

```sh
# Adding custom environmental variable path
export LOCAL="$HOME/installed-programs"
# Your case might be like following. Check and Double check your /path/location/to/bin always.
# export LOCAL="$HOME/path/to/other/place"

# For Cmake
export CMAKE_ROOT=$LOCAL/cmake
export CMAKE_BINARY_DIR=$CMAKE_ROOT/bin
export PATH=$CMAKE_BINARY_DIR${PATH:+:${PATH}}

# For ninja
export NINJA_ROOT=$LOCAL/ninja
export PATH=$NINJA_ROOT${PATH:+:${PATH}}

# for LLVM + Clang in $HOME (Use this to build llvm-project from source)
export LLVM_FOLDER_NAME="clang-and-llvm-16-prebuilt-binaries"
export LLVM_PROJECT_ROOT=$LOCAL/$LLVM_FOLDER_NAME
export LLVM_INSTALLATION_ROOT=$LLVM_PROJECT_ROOT
```
- To reload this new `ENV` variables your terminal instance, use the following command.
```sh
source ~/.profile
```
You can achieve the same thing by logging out from your OS user account, and then login again.

- Check in your terminal if all the (`cmake`, `ninja`, `clang`) installations are correct, with following commands
```sh
clang --version
# Returns
clang version 16.0.6 
Target: x86_64-unknown-linux-gnu
Thread model: posix
InstalledDir: /home/username/installed-programs/clang-and-llvm-16-prebuilt-binaries/bin


cmake --version
# Returns
cmake version 3.27.2
CMake suite maintained and supported by Kitware (kitware.com/cmake).


ninja --version
# Returns
1.11.1
```

- **(OPTIONAL) If commands are not found** If your terminal is giving you error (e.g. `Command 'cmake' not found, but can be installed with.....`), means you have definitely did mistake when you defined the path and registered that path to the `$PATH`. Simply speaking, your paths are wrong. So becareful when defining the paths/locations for those bins.

**1.4.2.2. Easy `clang` installation process for building `llvm` (NOT RECOMMENDED AT ALL)**
SKIP IT. NOT RECOMMENDED AT ALL. Must read the section **WHY MANUAL INSTALLATION WORTH IT! (MUST READ)** written at top.
```sh
sudo apt-get install clang-16 libclang-16-dev
```


## 2. How to build `LLVM`

### 2.1. Clone LLVM from github
- Clone `llvm-project` from github for version 18.x. While I'm writing this tutorial, it LLVM-18 in the main branch. And it is highly recommended by the MLIR project maintainers, to clone the latest from `main` branch to get all the latest features, changes and bug fixes.
- If you want to clone just `main` branch with all the git history, use following: (This will take long time depending on your internet connection speed).
```sh
git clone -b main https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project.git llvm-18-src-build
# or without specifying main, 
git clone https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project.git llvm-18-src-build

# if you don't want all the git history, use without the `--depth 1` flag. It takes a lot less time.
git clone -b main --depth 1 https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project.git llvm-18-src-build

# Or, if you want any other specific branch (i.e. llvm version)
git clone -b release/17.x https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project.git llvm-17-src-build

# Or,
git clone -b release/17.x --depth 1 https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project.git llvm-17-src-build
```


### 2.2. Write `cmake` configuration to `build.sh` for building `llvm`

- We will be doing this for `llvm-18-src-build`. Jump to 
```sh
cd llvm-18-src-build/
```

- Then create `/path/to/llvm-18-src-build/build.sh` file with following script/instructions.
```sh
# Create file and give the permission
touch build.sh
chmod +x build.sh
```

### _2.2.1. For Minimal Build (Recommended for new comer/learner/simple experiments)_

- We have to create `cmake` configuration for building `llvm`. Use the following `cmake` config for minimal build. **`-DLLVM_INSTALL_UTILS=ON` is very important as MLIR prerequisite, because it installs very important binary like `FileCheck`**. If you didn't setup the `clang-and-llvm-16-prebuilt-binaries` or, you don't have `clang`, `lld` installed in your OS, then modify these parameters to `-DCMAKE_C_COMPILER=gcc`, `-DCMAKE_CXX_COMPILER=g++`, `-DLLVM_ENABLE_LLD=OFF`, and remove `-DLLVM_PARALLEL_LINK_JOBS=1`.
```sh
mkdir -p build installation
cd build/

echo $PWD

cmake   \
    -G Ninja    \
    -S ../llvm  \
    -B .    \
    -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Release      \
    -DCMAKE_INSTALL_PREFIX=../installation  \
    -DLLVM_ENABLE_ASSERTIONS=ON     \
    -DLLVM_ENABLE_PROJECTS="mlir;clang;lld;lldb" \
    -DLLVM_INSTALL_UTILS=ON     \
    -DLLVM_ENABLE_LLD=ON    \
    -DCMAKE_C_COMPILER=clang    \
    -DCMAKE_CXX_COMPILER=clang++    \
    -DLLVM_PARALLEL_LINK_JOBS=1     \
    -DLLVM_TARGETS_TO_BUILD="Native"   \
    -DMLIR_INCLUDE_INTEGRATION_TESTS=ON    \
    -DLLVM_BUILD_EXAMPLES=ON    \
    -DLLVM_BUILD_TESTS=ON    \
    -DLLVM_INCLUDE_TESTS=ON    \
    -DMLIR_INCLUDE_TESTS=ON

# ninja -j$(nproc)

cmake --build . --target check-mlir
ninja install
```

### _2.2.2. (OPTIONAL) Advanced Build for Nvidia GPU users_

- Assuming you have `CUDA`, `clang`, `lld` in your system. If you already know, what those parameter means, directly jump to the configuration. Else, let me explain some of the important config parameters. `-DLLVM_ENABLE_PROJECTS="mlir;clang;lldb;lld;polly"` telling the llvm to build the following projects: `mlir`, `clang`, etc. You will be only needing `mlir`. But rest is upto you. **`-DMLIR_ENABLE_CUDA_RUNNER=ON` if you have `CUDA` installed in your machine**. `-DLLVM_PARALLEL_LINK_JOBS=1` needs `lld` linker in your `$PATH` which comes with `clang-and-llvm-16-prebuilt-binaries`. This linker helps to run build process faster by linking in parallel. `-DLLVM_TARGETS_TO_BUILD="Native;NVPTX"` is for which target architecture you are generating the binary. `NVPTX` is for Nvidia GPU. **DONOT FORGET `-DLLVM_INSTALL_UTILS=ON`**

```sh
mkdir -p build installation
cd build/

echo $PWD

cmake   \
    -G Ninja    \
    -S ../llvm  \
    -B .    \
    -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Release      \
    -DCMAKE_INSTALL_PREFIX=../installation  \
    -DLLVM_ENABLE_ASSERTIONS=ON     \
    -DLLVM_ENABLE_PROJECTS="mlir;clang;lld;lldb;polly;clang-tools-extra" \
    -DMLIR_ENABLE_CUDA_RUNNER=ON        \
    -DLLVM_INSTALL_UTILS=ON     \
    -DLLVM_ENABLE_LLD=ON    \
    -DCMAKE_C_COMPILER=clang    \
    -DCMAKE_CXX_COMPILER=clang++    \
    -DLLVM_PARALLEL_LINK_JOBS=1     \
    -DLLVM_TARGETS_TO_BUILD="Native;NVPTX"   \
    -DMLIR_INCLUDE_INTEGRATION_TESTS=ON    \
    -DLLVM_BUILD_EXAMPLES=ON    \
    -DLLVM_BUILD_TESTS=ON    \
    -DLLVM_INCLUDE_TESTS=ON    \
    -DMLIR_INCLUDE_TESTS=ON

# ninja -j$(nproc)

cmake --build . --target check-mlir
ninja install

```

### 2.3. Now run the `build.sh`

- Now run the `build.sh` file. You donot need to use `sudo`. This will take significant amount of time depending on how much `cores` you have in your cpu.

```sh
./build.sh
```
It will create 2 dirs `build` and `installation`. It will execute the build process inside `build` dir. When process will be done in `build` dir, all the `bin`, `include`, `lib` will be dumped in `llvm-18-src-build/installation` dir.

- **After the build process is finished, check your `llvm-18-src-build/installation` if it is populated with folders like `bin`, `include`, `lib`, etc.**. If you can find them, means **IT IS DONE!!!!!!!!**. Pfff.... at last ....😃😃😃😃😃😃😃😃

- **From this point, you have everything to start to play with `MLIR`. You can skip the latter sections.** 😊😊😊😊😊😊😊😊😊😊😊😊😊



### 2.4. (OPTIONAL) If the build process get stopped/bugged/corrupted, what to do?

- Stop the `build.sh` execution by `CTRL + c`.
- Delete the `build` and `installation` dir
```sh
rm -Rf build/ installation/
```
- Run the `build.sh` again.
- Why? Because `build/` dir might contain auto generated half done cmake config files. So later if we start to execute the shell again, it might read the old buggy auto generated files. So it is always best to delete them to have a clean build.



## 3. (OPTIONAL, But RECOMMENDED) How to register the `installation/bin` to the `$PATH`, and `installation/lib` to `$LD_LIBRARY_PATH`

- **If you want to use the built `clang` & `clang++` to build MLIR standalone project. I am gonna be using the `clang` bins from this build**.
- Also, if you want to use the `ENV` vars from here (e.g. `$LLVM_PROJECT_ROOT` or `$LLVM_INSTALLATION_ROOT`), to your MLIR out-of-tree template, you can update your `~/.profile` like following
- Or for any other purpose. This step is not mandatory. You can skip it if you want.

Now, Update your `~/.profile` like following. **Donot forget to `#comment` out the `$PATH` registration for `clang-and-llvm-16-prebuilt-binaries`**.
```sh

# Adding custom environmental variable path
export LOCAL="$HOME/installed-programs"
# Your case might
# export LOCAL="$HOME/path/to/other/place"

# For Cmake
export CMAKE_ROOT=$LOCAL/cmake
export CMAKE_BINARY_DIR=$CMAKE_ROOT/bin
export PATH=$CMAKE_BINARY_DIR${PATH:+:${PATH}}

# For ninja
export NINJA_ROOT=$LOCAL/ninja
export PATH=$NINJA_ROOT${PATH:+:${PATH}}

# for LLVM + Clang prebuilt binaries
# You can comment out the followings if you want to use the latest built
# export LLVM_FOLDER_NAME="clang-and-llvm-16-prebuilt-binaries"
# export LLVM_PROJECT_ROOT=$LOCAL/$LLVM_FOLDER_NAME
# export LLVM_INSTALLATION_ROOT=$LLVM_PROJECT_ROOT

# for LLVM + Clang Build (If you want to use this build)
export LLVM_FOLDER_NAME="llvm-18-src-build"
export COMPILER_PROJECT_PATH="/path/to/compiler-projects"     # Set your own dir
export LLVM_PROJECT_ROOT=$COMPILER_PROJECT_PATH/$LLVM_FOLDER_NAME
export LLVM_INSTALLATION_ROOT=$LLVM_PROJECT_ROOT/installation

export LLVM_CONFIG="$LLVM_INSTALLATION_ROOT/bin/llvm-config"
export LLVM_AND_CLANG_BIN_PATH="$LLVM_INSTALLATION_ROOT/bin"
export LLVM_AND_CLANG_LIB_PATH="$LLVM_INSTALLATION_ROOT/lib"
export LLVM_AND_CLANG_INCLUDE_PATH="$LLVM_INSTALLATION_ROOT/include"
export LD_LIBRARY_PATH=$LLVM_AND_CLANG_LIB_PATH${LD_LIBRARY_PATH:+:$LD_LIBRARY_PATH}
export PATH=$LLVM_AND_CLANG_BIN_PATH${PATH:+:${PATH}}

```
- To reload this new `ENV` variables your terminal instance, use the following command.
```sh
source ~/.profile
```
You can achieve the same thing by logging out from your OS user account, and then login again.

- Now check, if the latest `llvm` builds are registered in the `$PATH`. If you get the following returns...
```sh
clang --version
# Returns
clang --version
clang version 18.0.0git (https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project.git a4d1d5f5b54b2f93d7290588734f59ff24fc515c)
Target: x86_64-unknown-linux-gnu
Thread model: posix
InstalledDir: /path/to/compiler-projects/llvm-18-src-build/installation/bin
```

# Means it is done. 😃😃😃😃😃😃
